>> Woodruff: IRAQ ON THE BRINK.
PRESIDENT OBAMA SAYS U.S.
SUPPORT MAY BE NECESSARY TO PUSH
BACK MILITANTS WHO'VE CAPTURED
TWO MAJOR CITIES AND ARE GOING
AFTER BAGHDAD.
GOOD EVENING, I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
>> Ifill: AND I'M GWEN IFILL.
ALSO AHEAD THIS THURSDAY, A
MAJOR STUDY ON POLARIZATION IN
THE U.S. FINDS IT'S NOT JUST OUR
POLITICS.
THE IDEOLOGICAL DIVIDE IS AS
WIDE AS IT'S EVER BEEN.
>> Woodruff: AND AS SOCCER'S
WORLD CUP KICKS OFF, WHAT TO
WATCH, FROM THE GAMES
ELECTRIFYING STARS, TO THE U.S.
TEAM'S CHANCES FOR VICTORY.
>> THE FIRST GAME TO ME IS A
MUST-WIN GAME.
IF THEY LOSE AGAINST GHANA, I'VE
A FEELING THEY'LL BE HOME BEFORE
THE POSTCARDS.
>> Woodruff: THOSE ARE JUST SOME
OF THE STORIES WE'RE COVERING ON
TONIGHT'S PBS NEWSHOUR.
>> Ifill: HOUSE REPUBLICANS
SCRAMBLED TODAY TO ORGANIZE
THEIR PARTY AHEAD OF NEXT WEEK'S
VOTE FOR A NEW MAJORITY LEADER.
THE RACE HAS BEEN WHITTLED DOWN
TO TWO CONTENDERS: G.O.P. WHIP
KEVIN MCCARTHY OF CALIFORNIA AND
PETE SESSIONS OF TEXAS, THE
CHAIRMAN OF THE HOUSE RULES
COMMITTEE.
FELLOW TEXAN JEB HENSARLING
PULLED OUT OF THE RACE.
HOUSE SPEAKER JOHN BOEHNER DID
NOT THROW HIS SUPPORT BEHIND
EITHER CANDIDATE, BUT SAID HE
WOULD WORK WITH WHOEVER WINS.
>> THE MEMBERS ARE GOING TO MAKE
THIS DECISION.
WE'RE GOING TO DO IT NEXT WEEK.
I'M SURE SOME WILL ARGUE IT WAS
TOO SOON, SOME WILL ARGUE IT WAS
TOO LONG.
BUT IT'S IMPORTANT WE RESOLVE
THIS ISSUE IN A FAIR AMOUNT OF
TIME SO THAT WE CAN DO THE WORK
THAT WE WERE ELECTED TO DO.
>> Ifill: BOEHNER ALSO SAID
AMERICAN'S FRUSTRATION WITH
PRESIDENT OBAMA'S FAILED
POLICIES CONTRIBUTED TO ERIC
CANTOR'S LOSS.
BUT HOUSE MINORITY LEADER NANCY
PELOSI SAID  REPUBLICAN LEADERS
ARE TO BLAME AND THAT A NEW
LEADER WON'T MAKE MUCH OF A
DIFFERENCE.
>> WE HAVE NOT PASSED INFLATION.
WE HAVE NOT PASSED THE VOTING
RIGHTS ACT WHICH HAS ALWAYS BEEN
BIPARTISAN.
WE HAVE THE VOTES FOR THE
IMMIGRATION BILL.
IT PASSED THE SENATE IN A
BIPARTISAN WAY.
SO I DON'T KNOW HOW THINGS COULD
GET WORSE THAN THE OBSTRUCTION
THAT IS ALREADY HERE.
>> Ifill: ERIC CANTOR, WHO WAS
DEFEATED TUESDAY, WILL SERVE OUT
HIS TERM, BUT VACATE THE NUMBER
TWO LEADERSHIP SPOT AT THE END
OF JULY.
>> Woodruff: ARMY SERGEANT BOWE
BERGDAHL IS HEADED BACK TO THE
U.S. FROM AN ARMY MEDICAL CENTER
IN GERMANY.
IT WAS WIDELY REPORTED HE'LL
ARRIVE EARLY TOMORROW AT BROOK
ARMY MEDICAL CENTER IN SAN
ANTONIO, TEXAS FOR FURTHER
MEDICAL TREATMENT.
HE WAS HELD BY THE TALIBAN FOR
FIVE YEARS AND FREED ALMOST TWO
WEEKS AGO.
>> Ifill: U.S. DRONE STRIKES
HAVE STARTED BACK UP IN PAKISTAN
AFTER A NEARLY SIX-MONTH LULL.
PAKISTANI INTELLIGENCE OFFICIALS
SAID 13 SUSPECTED INSURGENTS
WERE KILLED OVERNIGHT IN TWO
SEPARATE STRIKES.
THE TARGETS WERE IN NORTHWEST
PAKISTAN IN NORTH WAZIRISTAN.
IT IS HOME TO A NUMBER OF
MILITANT GROUPS.
THE STRIKES COME JUST DAYS AFTER
THE AIRPORT IN KARACHI,
PAKISTAN'S BUSIEST, WAS
ATTACKED.
>> Woodruff: OIL PRICES SPIKED
TO THEIR HIGHEST LEVELS OF THE
YEAR TODAY ON NEWS OF THE
SPREADING INSURGENCY IN IRAQ.
IN NEW YORK TRADING, A BARREL OF
OIL SETTLED ABOVE $106 DOLLARS,
ITS HIGHEST CLOSE IN ALMOST NINE
MONTHS.
THE IRAQ TURMOIL ALSO IMPACTED
STOCKS ON WALL STREET.
THE DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE
LOST 109 POINTS TO CLOSE AT
16,734; THE NASDAQ FELL 34
POINTS TO CLOSE AT 4,297; AND
THE S&P 500 SHED NEARLY 14
POINTS TO CLOSE AT 1,930.
>> Ifill: FORMER PRESIDENT
GEORGE H.W. BUSH CELEBRATED HIS
90TH BIRTHDAY THE WAY HE
CELEBRATED HIS 75TH, 80TH AND
85TH BY JUMPING OUT OF A PLANE.
THE 41ST PRESIDENT MADE A TANDEM
PARACHUTE JUMP OVER THE SKIES
NEAR KENNEBUNKPORT, MAINE.
AFTER HIS LAST JUMP, HE'D VOWED
HE WOULD SKYDIVE AGAIN, EVEN
THOUGH HE CAN NOW NO LONGER
WALK.
FAMILY AND FRIENDS GREETED HIM
ON THE GROUND.
THIS WAS HIS EIGHTH JUMP.
THE FIRST CAME UNDER FIRE, WHEN
HIS PLANE WAS SHOT DOWN OVER THE
PACIFIC DURING WORLD WAR II.
>> Ifill: STILL TO COME ON THE
NEWSHOUR.
IRAQ STRUGGLES TO STEM A TIDE OF
INSURGENTS ACROSS THE COUNTRY.
A NEW SURVEY FINDS AMERICANS ARE
MORE POLARIZED THAN EVER.
WHAT TO WATCH FOR AS THE WORLD
CUP KICKS OFF.
A FRESH TAKE ON RISING ECONOMIC
INEQUALITY AROUND THE GLOBE.
PLUS, THE PASSING OF AN AWARD-
WINNING ACTRESS AND CIVIL RIGHTS
ADVOCATE, RUBY DEE.
>> Woodruff: AS MILITANTS FROM
THE ISLAMIC STATE OF IRAQ AND
THE LEVANT CONTINUED THEIR MARCH
TOWARD BAGHDAD AND WIDENED THE
GROUP'S AREAS OF OPERATION AND
CONTROL ACROSS SYRIA AND IRAQ
TALK IN WASHINGTON TURNED TO
WHETHER THE U.S. SHOULD RESPOND
AND HOW.
AT MIDDAY THE PRESIDENT SPOKE IN
THE OVAL OFFICE AFTER A MEETING
WITH AUSTRALIAN PRIME MINISTER
TONY ABBOTT.
HE SAID IRAQ WOULD NEED MORE
ASSISTANCE NOT ONLY FROM THE
U.S., BUT OTHER NATIONS AS WELL.
>> I DON'T RULE OUT ANYTHING
BECAUSE WE DO HAVE A STAKE IN
MAKING SURE THAT THESE JIHADISTS
ARE NOT GETTING A PERMANENT
FOOTHOLD IN EITHER IRAQ OR SYRIA
FOR THAT MATTER.
IN OUR CONSULTATIONS WITH THE
IRAQIS THERE WILL BE SOME SHORT
TERM IMMEDIATE THINGS THAT NEED
TO BE DONE MILITARILY AND OUR
NATIONAL SECURITY TEAM IS
LOOKING AT ALL THE OPTIONS.
BUT THE BASIC PRINCIPLE
OBVIOUSLY IS THAT WE LIKE ALL
NATIONS ARE PREPARED TO TAKE
MILITARY ACTION WHENEVER OUR
NATIONAL SECURITY IS THREATENED.
>> Woodruff: LATER,
ADMINISTRATION OFFICIALS SAID
THAT ALL OPTIONS DID NOT INCLUDE
U.S. FORCES ON THE GROUND IN
IRAQ.
"THE NEW YORK TIMES" REPORTED
THIS MORNING, THAT IRAQ HAD
ASKED THE OBAMA ADMINISTRATION
LAST MONTH TO CONDUCT AIR-
STRIKES ON MILITANTS IN WESTERN
IRAQ, BUT WAS DENIED.
AT THE CAPITOL EARLIER IN THE
DAY, HOUSE SPEAKER JOHN BOEHNER
HAD A HARSH DIRECT APPRAISAL OF
WHITE HOUSE POLICY TO DATE.
>> IT'S NOT LIKE WE HAVEN'T SEEN
THIS PROBLEM COMING FOR OVER A
YEAR.
AND IT HASN'T-- IT'S NOT LIKE WE
HAVEN'T SEEN OVER THE LAST FIVE
OR SIX MONTHS THESE TERRORISTS
MOVING IN TAKING CONTROL OF
WESTERN IRAQ, AND NOW THEY'VE
TAKEN CONTROL OF MOSUL.
THEY'RE A 100 MILES FROM
BAGHDAD.
AND WHAT'S THE PRESIDENT DOING?
TAKING A NAP!
>> Reporter: THAT ANGER WAS
ECHOED ON THE SENATE FLOOR FROM
ARIZONA REPUBLICAN JOHN MCCAIN.
HE LAID BLAME SQUARELY ON THE
WITHDRAWAL FROM IRAQ AT THE END
OF 2011, PUSHED FOR BY THE
PRESIDENT, AMID FAILED TALKS
WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF NOURI AL-
MALIKI FOR A FURTHER U.S.
PRESENCE.
>> TO DECLARE THAT A CONFLICT IS
OVER DOES NOT MEAN THAT IT
NECESSARILY IS OVER.
A TAKEOVER OF IRAQ IN THE IRAQ
SYRIA AREA WHICH IS NOW THE
LARGEST CONCENTRATION OF AL
QAIDA IN HISTORY IS A DIRECT
THREAT TO THE UNITED STATES OF
AMERICA.
>> Woodruff: BUT ELSEWHERE ON
THE HILL, HOUSE MINORITY LEADER
NANCY PELOSI SAID IT WAS THE
ORIGINAL DECISION TO INVADE, BY
THE GEORGE W. BUSH
ADMINISTRATION SUPPORTED BY
MCCAIN AND BOEHNER THAT WAS AT
FAULT.
SHE SAID SHE OPPOSED FURTHER
U.S. MILITARY ACTION IN IRAQ.
>> IT'S JUST NOT A GOOD IDEA,
AND WHAT'S NEXT?
THAT'S WHAT THE AMERICAN PEOPLE
WOULD WANT TO KNOW.
WHAT'S NEXT?
I THINK THIS REPRESENTS THE
FAILED POLICY THAT TOOK US DOWN
THIS PATHYE
>> Woodruff: VICE PRESIDENT
BIDEN SPOKE WITH IRAQI PRIME
MINISTER MALIKI EARLIER TODAY,
AND ACCORDING TO A WHITE HOUSE
STATEMENT, HE TOLD MALIKI THAT
THE U.S. IS PREPARED TO CONTINUE
TO INTENSIFY AND ACCELERATE
SECURITY SUPPORT AND COOPERATION
WITH IRAQ.
>> Woodruff: AMERICAN OFFICIALS
SAY THREE PLANELOADS OF
AMERICANS ARE BEING EVACUATED
FROM AN IRAQI AIRBASE IN SUNNI
TERRITORY NORTH OF BAGHDAD TO
ESCAPE THREATS FROM THE FAST-
MOVING INSURGENCY.
JONATHAN RUGMAN OF INDEPENDENT
THE IRAQI GOVERNMENT LAUNCHED
AIR STRIKES ON INSURGENT
POSITIONS IN AND ANN AROUND
MOSUL.
JONATHAN RUGMAN FILED THIS VIEW
OF INTENSIFIED FIGHTING FROM
IRBIL.
>> OUTSIDE KATUK, IRAQI TROOPS
FROM THE 12th DIVISION WERE
FILMED.
SEEMS THEY DIDN'T TRY FOR LONG.
SOMEBODY FILMED THE IRAQI
SOLDIERS FLEEING, MANY IN
CIVILIAN CLOTHING, AND
APPARENTLY LEAVING BEHIND THIS
MILITARY BASE AS A PLAY GOWNED
FOR JIHADISTS FROM IRAQ AND
AL-SHAM.
A PLAYGROUND, FROM THIS FOOTAGE,
WE COULD COUNT 14 ABANDONED
TANKS.
AND SO IT WAS THAT KURDS MOVED
IN.
THEY SAID TO STOP IT FROM
FALLING.
KIRKUK, THE CITY KURDS LONG
CLAIMED AS THEIR HISTORICAL
CAPITAL.
THE KURDISH FIGHTERS HERE ARGUE
THEY ARE THE ONLY FORCE FOR
STABILITY IN THIS REGION BECAUSE
SO MUCH OF THE IRAQI ARMY HAS
COLLAPSED.
BUT THE TEMPTATION FOR THE KURDS
IS TO HOLD ON TO KIRKUK COME
WHAT NAY NOT JUST BECAUSE OF ITS
OIL WEALTH BUT BECAUSE THEY'VE
ALWAYS WANTED IT AS PART OF A
FUTURE KURDISH STATE AND A
KURDISH STATE IS WHAT MIGHT
EVENTURELELY HAPPEN HERE IF IRAQ
DOES INDEED COLLAPSE.
AT THIS CHECKPOINT NORTH OF
KIRKUK, WE FOUND KURDISH FORCES
INSPECTING THE CARS OF REFUGEES
FOR JIHADIST WEAPONS AND
BOMB-MAKING EQUIPMENT.
ONE OF THEIR COMMANDERS HAD
EARLIER SURVIVED A ROADSIDE BOMB
ATTACK, BUT ONE OF HIS MEN DID
NOT.
THIS MAN SAID HE WAS A REFUGEE
FROM SYRIA, HAD FLED TO KIRKUK
TO SAFETY AND NOW WAS FLEEING
AGAIN, HE AND HIS FAMILY
STRUGGLING TO STAY AHEAD OF THE
JIHADIST LIGHTNING ADVANCE.
AND FROM TIKRIT, A RESTAURANT
OWNER, TOOK THESE FOAFSZ OF THE
JIHADISTS BEFORE HE PACKED UP
AND LEFT TOWN FEARING HIS THROAT
WOULD BE CUT IF HE STAYED.
>> HE TOOK ME OUTSIDE AND
CALLING MY FAMILY, MAYBE
$1 MILLION.
AND WHEN HE TAKE THE $1 MILLION,
HE KILL ME.
>> THAT THE WHAT YOU THOUGHT
MIGHT HAPPEN?
>> BECAUSE ALL THESE PEOPLE --
DID YOU SEE ANY FOREIGN
FIGHTERS?
PEOPLE FROM OUTSIDE IRAQ?
>> YEAH, YEAH.
I'M SEEING MAYBE AFGHANISTAN MAN
AND SYRIAN MAN.
>> BUT HOW COULD YOU TELL?
ECAUSE THE FACE IS
DIFFERENT, YOU KNOW.
AND WHEN HE SAY HELLO, THE
LANGUAGE OF THE PAKISTANI IS NOT
THE SAME AS IRAQI.
>> FROM THE NORTH, YOU CAN HEAR
WHAT SOUNDS LIKE A JIHADY WITH A
BRITISH ACCENT REVELING IN THE
CITY YESTERDAY.
>> WE ARE CELEBRATING.
IT'S A BIG ACHIEVEMENT.
>> AND THERE'S NO DOUBT FROM AN
AUDIO MESSAGE TO ITS FOLLOWERS
THAT ISIS BELIEVES IT NOW HAS IN
ITS SIGHTS BAGHDAD ITSELF.
WE HAVE A SCORE TO SETTLE IVME.
>> Woodruff: SO HOW ARE IRAQ'S
LEADERS IN BAGHDAD VIEWING THE
CRISIS?
FOR THAT I SPOKE A SHORT TIME
AGO TO JANE ARRAF, A FREELANCE
CORRESPONDENT FOR AL JAZEERA
ENGLISH AND CHRISTIAN SCIENCE
MONITOR.
SHE WAS IN IRBIL.
JANE ARRAF, THANK YOU VERY MUCH
FOR TALKING WITH US.
HOW IS THE GOVERNMENT IN BAGHDAD
DEALING WITH ALL THIS?
WE SEE REPORTS THAT A LARGE
NUMBER OF GOVERNMENT TROOPS ARE
SIMPLY LAYING DOWN THEIR ARMS IN
THE FACE OF THESE INSURGENTS.
>> IT'S ABSOLUTELY SCRAMBLING.
ONE OF THE THINGS THAT PRIME
MINISTER NOURI AL-MALIKI TRIED
TO DO ALOOK WITH FORMING A NEW
GOVERNMENT BEC A
GOVERNMENT IN THE MAKING IS
ESSENTIALLY HE HAS TRIED TO GET
PARLIAMENT TO AGREE TO DECLARE A
STATE OF EMERGENCY ACROSS THE
COUNTRY.
PARLIAMENT HAS DECLINED TO DO
THAT.
THEY FEEL HE WAS USING ALL OF
THIS FOR POLITICAL GAIN TO
FURTHER EXPAND HIS POWERS.
SO IT'S REALLY A POLITICAL
CRISIS ON TOP OF A HUGE SECURITY
CRISIS.
HE'S REACHING OUT TO THE UNITED
STATES, AS YOU'VE SEEN, AND
REACHING OUT TO KURDISH LEADERS
TO TRY TO SOLVE THIS BUT THIS IS
SUCH AN INTRACTABLE PROBLEM, AND
THE SAIL, THE IMPONES OF IT, THE
POTENTIAL REPERCUSSIONS OF
LOSING IRAQ'S SECOND BIGGEST
CITY ARE ABSOLUTELY HUGE IVMENT
IS THERE ANY QUESTION THERE,
JANE, ABOUT HOW SERIOUS A THREAT
THIS INSURGENCY POSES?
>> THERE'S VERY LITTLE QUESTION
BECAUSE THESE PEOPLE ARE NOT
GOING TO GO AWAY.
IN THE FACE OF FOUR DAYS, THEY
MANAGED TO TAKE OVER IRAQ'S
SECOND BIGGEST CITY, ONE OF THE
MAJOR CITIES IN IMPORTANCE AS
WELL AS TERMS OF SIZE.
SO, NOW WE HAVE A SITUATION
WHERE, ACCORDING TO PEOPLE WHO
ARE STILL COMING OUT TO TRY TO
COME TO THE KURDISH AREAS, STILL
COMING TO THE CHECKPOINT JUST
20 MILES FROM MOSUL, THEY SAY
THAT THE CITY IS NOW COMPLETELY
IN CONTROL OF THIS GROUP, THAT
ESSENTIALLY IS A REINCARNATION
OF AL QUAIDA, BUT THE GROUP, THE
ISLAMIC STATE OF IRAQ AND SYRIA
IS WORKING AS WELL WITH TRIBAL
LEADERS, SOME TRIBAL LEADERS
FROM FALLUJAH AND THE RAMADI
LEADER OF AL-ANBAR AND WHAT
APPEARS TO BE FIGHTERS WHO COME
DIRECTLY FROM ANBAR PROVINCE.
SO THIS ISN'T JUST A FOREIGN
EXTERNAL PROBLEM BUT A DOMESTIC
PROBLEM AND ONE THE IRAQI
GOVERNMENT HAS BEEN DEALING WITH
THOUGH NOT IN THIS DRAMATIC A
FORM FOR MANY, MANY MONTHS
IVMENT TALKING TO PEOPLE IN THE
GOVERNMENT, IS IT YOUR SENSE
THAT THEY BELIEVE THEY CAN HOLD
THIS OFF WITHOUT U.S. MILITARY
HELP?
>> THEY'RE PRETTY MUCH DESPERATE
FOR U.S. MILITARY HELP.
THE PROBLEM IS THAT U.S.
MILITARY HELP, WHETHER MORE
MISSILES OR DRONE STRIKES, ISN'T
REALLY GOING TO SOLVE THIS.
AT THE HEART OF THIS IS A
COUNTRY BEING TORN APART AND
TORN APART LARGELY BECAUSE LARGE
PARTS OF THE COUNTRY DON'T FEEL
THEY HAVE A SAY IN THEIR OWN
FUTURE.
THEY DON'T FEEL THEY CAN WALK IN
THE STREETS WITHOUT BEING
DISCRIMINATED AGAINST BY IRAQI
SECURITY FORCES.
ONE OF THE THINGS THAT HAS
REALLY COME CLEAR IN THE PAST
FEW DAYS, AGAIN, AS PEOPLE FLOOD
FROM MOSUL AND HALF A MILLION
IRAQIS HAVE LEFT MOSUL IS THAT
THERE IS A E RESIDUAL ANGER
AGAINST THE IRAQI SECURITY
FORCES IN MANY PARTS OF THESE
CITIES THAT'S GOING TO MAKE THIS
EVEN HARDER TO SOLVE.
IT'S NOT JUST A MILITARY
SECURITY PROBLEM, IT'S A
POLITICAL CRISIS AS WELL WITH
AND ONE THAT REALLY IS -- IT'S
REALLY HARD TO SEE WHERE THIS
WILL END.
>> JANE, FINALLY, WE KNOW THE
OBAMA ADMINISTRATION HAS BEEN
URGING PRIME MINISTER MALIKI FOR
SOME TIME TO REACH OUT TO THE
SUNNI LEADERSHIP, THE SUNNI
POPULATION IN IRAQ.
IS THERE ANY SENSE ON THE PART
OF HIS ADMINISTRATION THAT
THEY'RE NOW PREPARED TO DO THAT
OR THAT THEY ACKNOWLEDGE IT'S
BEEN A MISTAKE NOT TO?
>> JUDY, THERE ARE A FEW
PROBLEMS THERE.
ONE, IT'S NOT JUST A MONOLITHIC
SUNNI COMMUNITY.
WHO DOES HE REACH OUT TO?
IT'S A VERY DIVIDED SUNNI
POLITICAL CLASS, AND WE'RE
SEEING THAT IN THE PROBLEMS OF
FORMING A NEW GOVERNMENT.
THE IRAQI GOVERNMENT SEEMS TO
FEEL LIKE IT'S FIGHTING FOR ITS
LIFE.
THIS IS A FIGHT PURELY AGAINST
AL QUAIDA AND THE LATEST
INCARNATION OF AL QUAIDA.
THERE ISN'T A HUGE SENSE THERE
WHEN YOU TALK TO IRAQI
GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS THAT THEY
FEEL THAT THEY NEED TO MAKE
CONCESSIONS.
IN FACT, THE INCIDENT HERE WE'VE
SEEN IS PRETTY MUCH TO USE FORCE
AND THEN TALK LATER.
AS FOR MOSUL, TIKRIT, IS A MARIA
AND OTHER CITIES, IS IT
CONTINUING TO GROW, AND NOT JUST
A SECURITY PROBLEM, BUT
ESSENTIALLY WHAT MANY FEAR IS
THE DISINTEGRATION OF THE
COUNTRY IVMENT JANE ARRAF ON THE
GROUND IN IRBIL, IRAQ, THANK
YOU.
>> Woodruff: NOW, TO THE UNITED
STATES OPTIONS.
WE TURN TO TWO MEN WITH
EXTENSIVE EXPERIENCE DEALING
WITH IRAQ.
JAMES JEFFRIES WAS US
AMBASSADAOR TO TO IRAQ FROM 2010
TO 2012.
HE'S NOW A DISTINGUISHED
VISITING FELLOW AT THE
WASHINGTON INSTITUTE FOR NEAR
EAST POLICY.
FEISAL ISTRABADI WAS IRAQ'S
DEPUTY AMBASSADOR TO THE UNITED
STATES FROM 2004 TO 2007.
HE'S NOW A PROFESSOR OF THE
PRACTICE OF INTERNATIONAL LAW
AND DIPLOMACY INDIANA
UNIVERSITY, BLOOMINGTON.
AMBASSADOR, LET ME START WITH
YOU.
DO YOU SHARE I GUESS THE
PERCEPTION WE JUST GOT FROM JANE
ARRAF THAT THIS IS A COUNTRY
THAT MAY BE DISINTEGRATING AND
THIS IS EVERY BIT AS MUCH AS A
POLITICAL AS MILITARY CRISIS?
>> I DO.
I AGREE WITH MUCH OF WHAT JANE
SAID NOW.
IRAQ IS FACING AN EXISTENTIAL
CRISIS, A MOMENT WHERE THE IRAQI
POLITICAL CLASS AND THE BROADER
PEOPLE OF IRAQ HAVE TO ANSWER
THE QUESTIONS DO WE AS IRAQIS
WANT TO LIVE TOGETHER IN ONE
COUNTRY OR DO WE NOT AND WHAT
OTHER RAMIFICATIONS OF ANSWERING
THE QUESTION ONE WAY ANOTHER.
THE ROOT OF THE SOLUTION OF THIS
PROBLEM HAS BEEN FOR YEARS AND
NOT JUST IN THE LAST FOUR OR
FIVE DAYS A POLITICAL SOLUTION
AND THE CURRENT GOVERNMENT IN
IRAQ HAS SIMPLY FAILED TO LIVE
UP TO THE EXPECTATION THAT IT
COULD FIND A POLITICAL SOLUTION
BECAUSE AS JANE HAS JUST SAID IT
SEEKS A MILITARY SOLUTION FIRST.
>> SO AMBASSADOR JEFFERIES, IF
THAT'S THE CASE, DOES IT REALLY
MATTER ABOUT THIS CONVERSATION
BACK AND FORTH ABOUT MILITARY
HELP OR NOT FROM THE U.S.?
>> ABSOLUTELY.
I AGREE WITH EVERYTHING THE
AMBASSADOR AND JANE HAS SAID BUT
THE POINT IS RIGHT NOW WE'RE NOT
FACING SOME KIND OF LONG-TERM
CAMPAIGN OF RECONCILIATION OR
STABILITY LIKE IN IRAQ, WE'RE
FACING A CHALLENGE AS THE
I.S.I.L. FORCES SEIZE ALL OF
SUNNI ARAB IRAQ WHICH IS
ONE-THIRD THE COUNTRY IN THE
WEST.
WE'RE IN THE POSITION TO
ENCIRCLE BAGHDAD AND CUT IT OFF
FROM ELECTRICITY, OIL, WATER,
EVERYTHING IT NEEDS, AND THAT IS
AN EXTRAORDINARY THREAT.
THAT CAN PULL IN THE IRANIANS,
CAUSE THE KURDS TO LEAVE.
THAT'S A MILITARY THREAT.
>> WHAT DO YOU THINK NEEDS TO BE
DONE?
>> IN ORDER TO AVOID IRANIANS
COMING IN, KURDS GOING OUT AND
POSSIBLY EXTRAORDINARY DISASTER,
THE U.S. NEEDS TO PUT, AS THE
PRESIDENT SEEMS TO BE SUGGESTING
HE'S CONSIDERING, AIR POWER IN
AS HE DID IN LIBYA, EFFECTIVE
AGAINST MOBILE COLUMNS AS WE'VE
SEEN IN THE FILM CLIPS.
>> IF THAT'S WHAT HAPPENS AND
THERE IS AIR POWER, DOES THAT
CHANGE THE BALANCE OF WHAT'S
GOING ON THERE?
>> I DON'T THINK SO.
THE FACT IS THE UNITED STATES
COMMENCING IN 2003 WAS NEVER
ABLE TO GET AHOLD OF INCREASING
INSURGENCY AS IT WAS BUILDING UP
IN 2005, 2006, 2007.
THE WAY THAT GENERAL PETRAEUS
WAS ABLE TO MAKE THE VIOLENCE
DECREASE IN IRAQ WAS BY
NEGOTIATING A SERIES OF
POLITICAL DEALS WITH SUNNI
TRIBAL SHEIKHS AND OTHERS IN THE
COMMUNITY.
THE PRIME MINISTER OF IRAQ
RENEGED ON ALL THE PROMISES.
WITHOUT THE POLITICAL DEALS,
THERE IS, IN MY OPINION, NO
MILITARY SOLUTION TO THE
PROBLEM.
IF THE UNITED STATES WAS IN IRAQ
FOR TEN YEARS WITH TALL THE
WEAPONRY AND INTELLIGENCE ASSETS
IT HAS WAS UNABLE TO DEFEAT THE
INSURGENCY, THE IRAQIS WON'T BE
ABLE TO DO IT.
>> YOU HEARD AMBASSADOR
JEFFERIES SAY IF NOTHING IS DONE
WE'RE LOOKING AT A DIRE CHANGE
OF CIRCUMSTANCES.
>> I UNDERSTAND THAT AND, ONCE
AGAIN, I SAY THAT THE IRAQIS, I
THINK, ARE GOING TO HAVE TO
DECIDE THE EXOSTEENINGSLE
QUESTION OF TO BE OR NOT TO BE.
IF THE IRAQIG TO
MAKE A STAND, IT HAS TO STAUNCH
THE BLEEDING.
WE HAVE TO MAKE MILITARY
PROGRESS.
WHAT IS AIR POWER GOING TO DO?
ARE YOU GOING TO BOMB THE
CITIES, TIKRIT, MOSUL?
WHOLE CITIES HAVE FALLEN --
>> LET ME PUT THE QUESTION TO
AMBASSADOR JEFFERIES.
>> FIRST OF ALL, I DISAGREE.
THE AMBASSADOR WAS RIGHT, THE
UNITED STATES WITH SOME HELP
FROM IRAQIS REACHED OUT TO
SUNNIS IN 2006-2007, AND THAT'S
THE KIND OF SOLUTION THE
AMBASSADOR IS RECOMMENDING AND I
AGREE WITH.
BUT THAT THE NOT WHAT WILL
HAPPEN IN THE NEXT WEEK OR.
SO THE AMERICANS UP TO THAT TIME
MAY NOT HAVE SUCCEEDED IN ENDING
THE INSURGENCIES BUT WE KEPT
MAJOR CITIES OUT OF THE HANDS OF
THESE PEOPLE WITH AMERICAN FIRE
POWER AND THAT'S WHAT'S LACKING
NOW.
WITHOUT AMERICAN FIRE POWER ON
THE GROUND, CITY AFTER CITY IS
GOING TO FALL AND YOU'RE GOING
TO HAVE A CATASTROPHE THE LIKES
OF WHAT THE MIDDLE EAST HAS NOT
SEEN IN A LONG TIME.
>> I ASSUME A DEBATE LIKE THIS
IS GOING ON INSIDE THE OBAMA
ADMINISTRATION RIGHT NOW.
AMBASSADORRISAMBASSADOR ISTRABAU
BELIEVE THERE IS POLITICAL WILL
ON BEHALF OF PRIME MINISTER
NOURI AL-MALIKI TO DO WHAT
YOU'RE SAYING?
>> I DO NOT.
I HAVE SEEN NO EVIDENCE HE IS
PREPARED TO ENGAGE IN ANY
MEANINGFUL PROCESS OF
RECONCILIATION, HAVING MEETINGS
WHICH HE IS PERFECTLY WILLING TO
DO IS NOT RECONCILIATION.
HE IS UNWILLING TO SHARE POWER.
HE HAS BECOME, TO PARAPHRASE
RONALD REAGAN, A PART OF THE
PROBLEM, NOT THE SOLUTION.
THEY NEED NEW LEADERSHIP IN
IRAQ.
>> WHO?
LET THE IRAQIS DECIDE.
THIS IS A MOMENT FOR THE IRAQI
POLITICAL ELITES WHO HAVE JUST
BEEN REELECTED, THIS IS A MOMENT
FOR THEM TO GROW UP.
THIS IS A MOMENT FOR THEM TO
REALIZE THAT THE STAKES AREN'T
PERSONAL.
THIS ISN'T SOME PERSONAL
DISPUTE.
THE THE COUNTRY IS AT STAKE.
THEY NEED TO RISE TO THE
CHALLENGE AND THEY NEED TO DO SO
NOW.
>> AMBASSADOR JEFFERIES.
HE'S ABSOLUTELY RIGHT.
OVER THE LONGER TERM, THAT'S
EXACTLY THE PROBLEM AND
AMBASSADOR ISTRABADI HAS A GOOD
SOLUTION, WHETHER THIS AL-MALIKI
OR A NEW ONE WHICH THE OLD ONE
WAS NOT HELPFUL, REMAINS TO BE
SEEN.
THAT'S WEEKS IF NOT MONTHS
AHEAD.
WE NOW HAVE A MILITARY
SITUATION.
IF WE DON'T STOP IT, THERE WILL
BE NO COLD FRONT GOVERNMENT, BUT
WILL BE CATASTROPHE ALL UP AND
DOWN IRAQ.
>> WE HEAR YOU BOTH AND THIS IS
THE KIND OF URGENT SITUATION WE
ARE WATCHING CONSTANTLY.
AMBASSADORS, WE THANK YOU.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Ifill: A HUGE NEW PEW
RESEARCH CENTER STUDY OF 10,000
AMERICAN ADULTS, FINDS US MORE
DIVIDED THAN EVER WITH PERSONAL
AND POLITICAL POLARIZATION AT A
20-YEAR HIGH.
THE NUMBER OF PEOPLE IDENTIFYING
THEMSELVES AS EITHER
CONSISTENTLY LIBERAL OR
CONSISTENTLY CONSERVATIVE, HAS
DOUBLED IN THE LAST DECADE.
THEY ARE LESS LIKELY TO
COMPROMISE, AND OFTEN DECIDE
WHERE TO LIVE, WHO TO MARRY, AND
WHO THEIR FRIENDS SHOULD BE
BASED ON WHAT THEY ALREADY
BELIEVE.
JOINING US NOW TO TALK ABOUT THE
NEW AMERICAN EXTREMES ARE.
MICHAEL DIMOCK, VICE PRESIDENT
OF RESEARCH AT PEW AND THE LEAD
AUTHOR ON THE SURVEY AND AMY
WALTER, NATIONAL EDITOR AT THE
COOK POLITICAL REPORT.
LET'S START WITH THE SELF
LABELING QUESTION, MICHAEL
DIMOCK.
11% IN 2004, 21% IN 2014 PEOPLE
SAID THEY WERE EITHER
CONSISTENTLY LIBERAL OR
CONSERVATIVE.
>> RIGHT, AND WE'RE NOT GOING BY
WHAT PEOPLE CALL THEMSELVES.
WE'RE ASKING QUESTIONS
MAJOR POLITICAL VALUES, ROLE OF
GOVERNMENT, SOCIAL ISSUES THAT
ARE A BENEFIT OR HARM TO OUR
SOCIETY AND WE'RE FINDING MORE
AND MORE PEOPLE CONSISTENTLY
ANSWERING THOSE QUESTIONS IN A
LIBERAL OR CONSERVATIVE
DIRECTION, STILL A MINORITY,
21%, BUT DOUBLING OVER THE LAST
21 YEARS.
>> Ifill: AND STILL PEOPLE
LIACH OTHER A LOT LESS,
GROWING ANTIPATHY.
FROM 1994, DEMOCRATIC ATTITUDES
ABOUT THE REPUBLICAN PARTY FROM
16% TO 38% AS VERY UNFAVORABLE
NOW, SAME THING FOR REPUBLICANS,
FROM 17% IN 1994 TO 43% IN 2014.
>> RIGHT.
I MEAN, IT'S NOT UNUSUAL TO KIND
OF DISLIKE THE OTHER PARTY, BUT
NOW THEY'RE VERY
FROM POLLSTERS IS UP.
WE ASKED A FOLLOW-UP QUESTION
SAYING WOULD YOU SO FAR AS TO
SAY THE OTHER PARTY POSES A
THREAT TO THE WELL BEING OF THE
NATION OR WOULDN'T YOU GO THAT
FAR?
MOST PEOPLE WOULD GO THAT FAR.
MORE THAN A THIRD OF REPUBLICANS
SAY THE DEMOCRATS ARE A THREAT
TO THE NATION, MORE THAN A
QUARTER OF DEMOCRATS SAYING THE
SAME THING ABOUT THE
REPUBLICANS.
>> Ifill: AMY, WHAT IS THE
CHICKEN AND THE EGG?
IS IT PEOPLE CHOOSE TO LIVE
AMONG PEOPLE LIKE THEMSELVES AND
THEY BECOME LIKE THAT OR THEY
DEFY THE BELIEFS AND CHOOSEO
ONLY ASSOCIATE WITH PEOPLE LIKE
THEM?
>> I THINK BOTH.
TECHNOLOGY HAS ONLY HELPED TO
EXACERBATE THIS.
THERE WAS A TIME WHERE IT'S NOT
JUST THAT YOU CHOOSE TO LIVE IN
COMMUNITIES WHERE PEOPLE THINK A
LOT LIKE YOU AND I THE STUDY
DEFINITELY SHOWED PEOPLE WHO ARE
MORE LIBERAL LIVE IN URBAN AREAS
AND PEOPLE MORE CONSERVATIVE
LIVE IN RURAL AREAS.
IN RURAL AREAS, THEY CITE
RELIGIOUS ISSUES AS THE MOST
IMPORTANT VALUE.
AND THEN IT GETS EXACERBATED BY
THE FACT THAT YOU CAN LITERALLY
ISOLATE YOURSELF IN A BUBBLE
THANKS TO OUR TECHNOLOGY ON THE
INTERNET, ON CABLE TELEVISION,
YOU NEVER EVER HAVE TO SEE OR
HEAR ANYTHING THAT DISAGREES
WITH YOUR WORLD VIEW OR YOUR
IDEOLOGICAL POINT OF VIEW.
>> Ifill: WE KNEW THIS.
IT'S KIND OF STUNNING TO SEE THE
NUMBERS.
IT IS JUST ABOUT POLITICS,
MICHAEL, OR EVERYTHING WE ARE?
>> IT GOES FURTHER, PICKING UP
ON WHAT AMY SAID.
SOME OF THE CHOICES THAT MAY
LEAD TO WHAT CALL ECHO CHAMBERS
WHERE YOUR VIEWS ARE REBOUNDED,
THEY'RE CHOICES YOU'RE MAKING
FOR OTHER PRIORITIES IN YOUR
LIFE BUT CORRELATED WITH
POLITICS AND LEAD YOU TO BE
AROUND OTHER PEOPLE WHO SHARE
YOUR VIEWS, WHETHER PREFERRING
TO LIVE IN A BIG HOUSE FAR FROM
THINGS EVEN IF YOU HAVE TO
DRIVE, WHICH 75% OF
CONSERVATIVES TELL US IS
IMPORTANT TO THEM OR LIVING IN A
SMALL COMMUNITY WHERE YOU CAN
WALK TO THINGS EVEN IF YOU HAVE
TO LIVE IN A SMALLER HOUSE WHICH
75% OF LIBERALS SAY WOULD BE
THEIR PREFERENCE.
>> Ifill: WHAT HAPPENS TO THE
MIDDLE?
35% CONSISTENTLY LIBERAL DON'T
REALLY MUCH BELIEVE IN
COMPROMISE.
33% WHO ARE CONSISTENTLY
CONSERVATIVES DON'T MUCH BELIEVE
IN COMPROMISE, BUT IN THE MIDDLE
THERE ARE 54% WHO ARE NEITHER
CHICKEN MORE EGG.
CHICKEN NOR EGG WHO SAY, YOU
KNOW, MAYBE.
SO HERE'S THE PROBLEM --
>> THE STUDY POINTS THIS
WITHOUT, THE PEOPLE ARE THE
MAJORITY BUT NOT THE MAJORITY OF
VOTERS.
THEY DON'T SHOW UP TO VOTE
ESPECIALLY IN PRIMARIES.
THE MOST ENGAGED VOTERS ARE ALSO
THE MOST IDEOLOGICALLY PARTISAN
AND THE ONES WHO DISLIKE THE
OTHER PARTY THE MOST.
WHAT'S DRIVING THEM TO THE POLLS
IN THOSE CASEs NOT LOVE FOR
THEIR PARTY BUT THE DISLIKE FOR
THE OTHER SIDE.
>> Ifill: IS THAT WHAT OF WHAT
WE SAW IN THIS WEEK'S BIG
POLITICAL SURPRISE?
>> ABSOLUTELY.
THE PEOPLE MOST MOTIVATED TO GO
OUT AND VOTE ARE THE PEOPLE WHO
ARE IN THE CONSISTENTLY
LIBERAL/CONSERVATIVE CATEGORY.
AND THE PEOPLE IN THE MIDDLE
STAY HOME.
WE TALK ABOUT WE'VE GOTTEN THEE.
THE 10 TO 20% OF THE ELECTORATE
VOTED FOR IT.
SO THOSE FOLKS IN THE MIDDLE,
THEIR VOICE ISN'T HEARD IN SOME
CASES BECAUSE THEY HAVEN'T
VOTED.
>> Ifill: IS IT THE SAME THING
AS POLARIZATION.
>> THE POLITICAL SCIENTISTS
WOULD WANT US TO HOLD THOSE
THINGS APART AND WE TRIED TO BE
TRUE TO THAT.
IDEOLOGY, WAY YOU THINK ABOUT
THE WORLD, PRIORITIES, THE ROLE
OF GOVERNMENT, THAT'S ONE
ELEMENT AND WE'RE SEEING THIS AS
SORTING OUT INTO THESE WINGS, SO
TO SPEAK, BUT PARTISANSHIP, I
THINK, IS MORE ABOUT THIS IDEA
THAT THE OTHER SIDE IS REALLY
WRONG AND NO MIDDLE GROUND, SO
THE COMPROMISE FIGURES FOR MOST
AMERICANS WHEN THEY SAY WHERE
SHOULD OBAMA AND REPUBLICANS END
UP WHEN THEY DISAGREE, MOST
AMERICANS 50/50, JUST NATURAL,
SPLIT THE DIFFERENCE, BUT TO THE
FOLKS ON THE LEFT AND THE RIGHT,
THAT'S NOT THE NATURAL MEETING
POINT OR WHERE THEY SHOULD END
UP.
THE LIBERALS TELL US OBAMA
SHOULD GET TWO-THIRDS OF WHAT HE
WANTS IN ANY DEAL WITH THE
REPUBLICANS AND THE
CONSERVATIVES SAY THE SAME THING
THE OTHER WAY.
>> Ifill: ON THE ISSUES WE
DEBATE ALL THE TIME, GUN RIGHTS,
ABORTION, IMMIGRATION REFORM,
THIS DOES NOT BODE WELL.
>> RIGHT.
>> Ifill:.
WE AS A BROADER ELECTORATE
ARE SAYING WE WANT PEOPLE TO
COMPROMISE.
WHEN WE LOOK AT THE PEOPLE
TURNING OUT AND VOTING, THOSE
PEOPLE HAVE NO DESIRE TO
COMPROMISE.
IN FACT, THAT IS THE AXE LULL
OPPOSITE OF WHAT THEY WOULD LIKE
TO SEE.
SO NOT EVEN SO MUCH ABOUT THE
POLICY ITSELF, IT'S THE IDEA
THAT THEY COULD BE IN A ROOM
WITH SOMEBODY FROM A DIFFERENT
PARTY ACTUALLY COMING UP WITH AN
AGENDA WHEN BOTH SIDES HAVE TO
GIVE IN.
>> Ifill: IS THAT POLICY
SPECIFIC, MICHAEL?
>> IT IS.
ONE OF THE INTERESTING THINGS WE
WANTED TO TEASE OUT IS BECAUSE
YOU'RE CONSISTENTLY LIBERAL OR
CONSERVATIVE ON VIEWS DOESN'T
MAKE YOU EXTREME OR THAT YOU
HOLD HARD' LINE VIEWS.
IN FACT, ONE TO HAVE THE
CHALLENGES OF A CENTER IS THE
CENTER IS FRAGMENTED, IT'S ALL
OVER THE PLACE, AND THEY'RE NOT
NECESSARILY MODERATE IN THEIR
VIEWS.
THEY'RE NOT ALWAYS LOOKING FOR
THE MIDDLE GROUND.
MANY HOLD VERY, VERY STRONG
VIEWS ON ISSUES LIKE ABORTION OR
HOMOSEXUALITY OR THE ROLE OF
GOVERNMENT, IT'S JUST THAT THEY
DON'T FIT CLEANLY INTO
IDEOLOGICAL CATEGORIES.
THEY'RE A LITTLE ALL OVER THE
MAP AND, THEREFORE, HARD TO
GATHER INTO A NEW FORCE IN
POLITICS.
>> MICHAEL DIMOCK OF THE PEW
RESEARCH CENTER, AMY WALTER OF
COOK POLITICAL REPORT.
THANK YOU, THIS IS AN AMAZING
PIECE OF STUDY WORK.
AND WE GET OUR OWN VIEWER'S
GUIDE FROM THE CUP, TONY SMYTH,
FEATURED ON ESPNFC.
AND MATTHEW IS COVERING US FROM
THE "WALL STREET JOURNAL."
MATTHEW, WE'RE THE HOST TEAM
WHICH IS A POWER HOUSE.
WE'RE TALKING BEFORE THE FIRST
MATCH.
WHAT ARE THE EXPECTATIONS THIS
TIME FOR BRAZIL?
>> WELL, FOR A COUNTRY LIKE
BRAZIL, THERE'S ONLY ONE
EXPECTATION AND THAT'S TO WIN
THE WORLD CUP.
THAT'S THE WAY THEY GO INTO
THESE BIG TOURNAMENTS, THAT'S
WHAT'S EXPECTED OF THEM AND
HOPED FOR AND ANYTHING LESS
WOULD BE CONSIDERED A FAILURE.
>> Brown: TREMENDOUS PRESSURE
ON THEM AS ALWAYS, ESPECIALLY IN
THEIR OWN HOME NATION.
>> ABSOLUTELY, TREMENDOUS
PRESSURE, AND WITH BRAZIL,
WHAT'S UNIQUE, IS THERE'S NOT
JUST TREMENDOUS PRESSURE TO WIN
THE GAME BUT TO WIN THEM
BEAUTIFULLY.
IT'S TO PLAY A STYLE OF SOCCER
THAT COMES WITH SORT OF
ACROBATICS AND HEEL PASSES AND
ALL SORTS OF FANCINESS THAT HAS
ENTHRALLED GENERATIONS OF
BRAZILIANS.
SO THEY HAVE TO WIN AND WIN WITH
STYLE.
>> Brown: TOMMY SMYTH, BROADEN
IT OUT.
WHO ARE YOU WATCHING?
>> WELL, I'M GOING TO BE
WATCHING -- I MEAN, ARGENTINA IS
CERTAINLY A TEAM YOU'RE GOING TO
HAVE TO WATCH AND SERGEANT IS
ARGUABLY THE BEST PLAYER IN THE
WORLD.
PORGY IS THE SECOND PLAYER,
RENALDO, THE ITALIANS ARE ALWAYS
THERE.
THE GERMANS ARE STAR STUDDED.
THERE'S NO SHORTAGE OF GOOD
TEAMS IN THIS WORLD CUP, BELIEVE
ME.
>> Brown: TOMMY, YOU MENTIONED
THE GREAT AND GOOD TEAMS.
ARE THERE ANY DARK HORSES OR
NON-TRADITIONAL POWER HOUSES
THAT MIGHT WIN OR DO WELL?
>> JUST MARK IN YOUR NOTEBOOK
BELGIUM BECAUSE BELGIUM HAS
REALLY COME THROUGH QUALIFYING
IN EUROPE.
THEY WERE UNBELIEVABLE.
THEY'RE AN INCREDIBLE TEAM.
IF THE PRESSURE AND THE HYPE
DOESN'T GET TO THEM, THAT COULD
BE A VERY DARK HORSE FOR THIS
WORLD CUP.
FANCY THEY WILL GO A LONG WAY.
>> Brown: MATTHEW, A NEW
COACH, HE TOOK DRAMATIC ACTION
IN THE U.S., LEAVING OFF THE
SQUAD ONE OF THE MOST FAMOUS
PLAYERS, PERHAPS.
WHAT'S THE SITUATION FOR THE
U.S. TEAM
>> I THINK THE U.S. IS FEELING
VERY GOOD ABOUT THEMSELVES RIGHT
NOW.
I WAS JUST WITH THEM ON
WEDNESDAY.
HEAD COACH KLEMSMAN, THE GERMAN
YOU SPOKE ABOUT, IS VERY
POSITIVE.
GHANA ELIMINATED THE U.S. IN THE
LAST TWO WORLD CUPS.
THEY'RE DETERMINED TO MAKE THAT
NOT HAPPEN A THIRD TIME.
THIS IS INTERESTING, SEVERAL
GERMAN-AMERICANS ON THE TEAM.
THEY'VE COME TOGETHER, ON A BIT
OF A ROLL, WON THREE GAMES IN A
ROW, THREE TOURNAMENT MATCHES
BEFORE THEY CAME AND THEY'RE
IN ABOUT THEMSELVES.
>> Brown: TOMMY, WHAT DO YOU
THINK ABOUT THE CHANCE FORCE THE
U.S. TEAM?
>> THE KEY IS HOW DAY DO AGAINST
DPA NAY.
IF THEY -- GHANA.
IF THEY LOSE AGAINST GHANA, THEY
SHOULD GET POSTCARDS.
MY KEY FOR THE U.S. IS YOU'VE
GOT TO GET -- THIS IS A MUST-WIN
GAME.
THE FIRST GAME IS A MUST-WIN
GAME AND, YOU KNOW, MAYBE THE
THIRD TIME IS THE CHARM BECAUSE
GHANA HAS ALREADY KNOCKED THEM
OUT TWICE SO THE U.S. CERTAINLY
OWED THEM ONE.
>> Brown: IT'S FUNNY, TOMMY
BECAUSE COACH KLINSMANN IS
TELLING EVERYONE THE U.S. HAS NO
CHANCE TO WIN.
SO THAT'S A LITTLE UNUSUAL
PSYCHOLOGY GOING INTO THE WORLD
CUP OR ANY MATCH.
>> I NEVER PLAYED UNDER A COACH
WHO TOLD ME I DIDN'T THINK I WAS
GOING TO WIN.
EVEN WHEN HE DIDN'T THINK I WAS
GOING TO WIN, HE TOLD ME I
WOULD.
I DON'T UNDERSTAND WHAT
KLINSMANN IS DOING, BUT IF HE
WINS HE'LL BE A HERO.
IF HE DOESN'T, I WOULD HATE TO
BE IN HIS SHOES AFTERWARDS.
>> Brown: TELL US THE GENERAL
THEMES OF THE WORLD CUP AND OF
WORLD FOOTBALL, SOCCER THESE
DAYS.
ONE IS GLOBALIZATION THAT THESE
PLAYERS, THIS IS SORT OF A
NATIONAL COMPETITION.
BUT THESE PLAYERS PLAY ALL OVER
THE WORLD, DON'T THEY?
>> YEAH, THEY DO PLAY ALL OVER
THE WORLD, EXCEPT THERE IS A
TREND AMONG THE BRAZILIANS THAT
SINCE THERE'S MORE MONEY IN
BRAZIL NOW, SOME OF THE BEST
BRAZILIANS ACTUALLY PLAY IN THE
DOMESTIC LEAGUE.
BUT, YES, IT USED TO BE FOR
YEARS THAT THE SOUTH AMERICAN
PLAYERS WERE THE MAGIC, CREATIVE
PLAYERS, BUT EUROPE HAD THESE
GREAT POWER HOUSE TEAMS THAT
WERE SORT OF TECHNICALLY MORE
SOPHISTICATED IN TERMS OF
STRATEGY AND THAT WAS WHAT
PREVAILED.
THAT IS SORT OF -- THEY'VE EACH
DRAWN FROM EACH OTHER IN RECENT
YEARS, WHERE IS EUROPEANS HAD
BECOME VERY SORT OF SKILLED WITH
THEIR FEET AND TECHNICAL IN THAT
SENSE, AND THE SOUTH AMERICAN
TEAMS HAVE GOTTEN MUCH MORE
DISAPPOINTED AND MUCH MORE
ORGANIZED, AND I THINK YOU'RE
GOING TO SEE HERE ON
SOUTH AMERICAN SOIL SOME OF
THOSE TEAMS DO VERY WELL.
TOMMY MENTIONED BELGIUM AS A
DARK HORSE.
I WOULD KEEP AN EYE ON CHILE AND
SOME OF THE OTHER SOUTH AMERICAN
TEAMS BECAUSE THEY ALL FEEL VERY
COMFORTABLE HERE, IT'S VERY
CLOSE TO HOME AND THE EUROPEANS
HAVE NEVER LIFTED THE WORLD CUP
TROPHY IN THIS PART OF THE
WORLD.
>> Brown: TOMMY SMYTH, WHAT
WOULD YOU ADD TO THAT IN TERMS
OF HOW THE GAME CHANGED IN TERMS
OF GLOBALIZATION AND THE NATURE
OF WHERE PLAYERS PLAY THESE
DAYS?
>> THEY DO CALL IT THE WORLD
GAME.
BELIEVE ME, ALL YOU HAVE TO DO
NOW IS FIND A GRANDFATHER OR A
GRANDMOTHER THAT ACTUALLY CAME
FROM ONE COUNTRY AND YOU CAN
PLAY FOR ANOTHER COUNTRY.
THERE'S A GREAT EXAMPLE, PLAYER
DIEGO COSTA, WHO PLAYED FOR
SPAIN.
SPAIN WON THE LAST TIME AROUND.
DIEGO COSTA IS A BRAZILIAN WHO
SIGNED TO PLAY W SO
THE BRAZILIAN IS ACTUALLY GOING
BACK HOME TO HIS OWN COUNTRY TO
PLAY FOR ANOTHER COUNTRY.
SO THAT IN ITSELF IS JUST SO
UNIQUE AND I'VE NEVER SEEN IT
HAPPEN BEFORE.
>> Brown: THAT'S A LITTLE HEAD
SPINNING AS WE START THIS WORLD
CUP.
>> IT CERTAINLY IS.
I MEAN, I KNOW PEOPLE OUT THERE
ARE SAYING, YEAH, BUT YOU IRISH
GUYS DID IT FOR A LONG TIME,
LOOK AT ALL THE ENGLISH GUYS YOU
HAD PLAY FOR THEM.
BUT THIS IS DIFFERENT AND MUCH
MORE MAJOR.
BELIEVE ME, IT'S A DIFFERENT
TREND, AND I DON'T KNOW, I THINK
IT'S GOING TO CONTINUE.
YOU WILL NOT SEE THE END OF IT
VERY SOON.
>> Brown: ALL TO UNFOLD OVER
THE COMING WEEKS.
TOMMY SMYTH AND MATTHEW
FUTTERMAN.
THANKS VERY MUCH.
>> THANKS.
>> Ifill: TODAY ON TWITTER WE
ASKED YOU: WHAT DO YOU FIND MOST
BEAUTIFUL ABOUT THE GAME?
TWEET US YOUR RESPONSE
>> Woodruff: NEXT, A
CONVERSATION ABOUT THE SCOPE OF
GROWING INEQUALITY, NOT ONLY IN
THE U.S. BUT IN OTHER COUNTRIES
AROUND THE WORLD.
IT'S THE FOCUS OF NEW RESEARCH
BY THE ORGANIZATION FOR ECONOMIC
COOPERATION AND DEVELOPMENT OR
O.E.C.D.
AMONG ITS FINDINGS: INCOME
INEQUALITY HAS BEEN RISING OVER
THE PAST THREE DECADES IN THE
U.S. MOST OF ALL, BUT ALSO IN
OTHER COUNTRIES INCLUDING THE
UNITED KINGDOM, CANADA, AND
FRANCE.
THE O.E.C.D. ALSO SAID THE SHARE
OF INCOME GOING TO THE RICHEST
CITIZENS GREW IN MANY COUNTRIES.
WITH THE WEALTHIEST 1% OF THE
POPULATION IN THE U.S. MORE THAN
DOUBLING THEIR SHARE SINCE 1980.
TO NEARLY 20% OF ALL INCOME.
SECRETARY GENERAL ANGEL GURRIA
IS THE HEAD OF THE O.E.C.D. HE
WAS IN WASHINGTON TODAY FOR A
SPEECH ON THE SUBJECT AND JOINS
ME NOW.
WELCOME TO THE "NEWSHOUR."
>> THANK YOU.
IS O.E.C.D., THIS
ORGANIZATION FOUNDED IN EUROPE
PRINCIPALLY AROUND EUROPEAN
COUNTRIES INTERESTED IN
INEQUALITY IN THE U.S.
WHY?
>> FIRST OF ALL, THE
ORGANIZATION WAS FOUND BID THE
UNITED STATES BECAUSE IT'S A
SUCCESSOR TO THE MARSHALL PLAN.
THE UNITED STATES ARE HEAVILY
INVESTED IN THE ORGANIZATION AND
HEAVILY INVESTED IN EUROPE, OF
COURSE.
SECOND, IT HAPPENS TO BE BASED
IN PARIS, BUT IT HAS 34 MEMBERS,
20 OF WHICH ARE EUROPEAN, THE
REST NON-EUROPEAN.
SO THEY'RE FROM ALL OVER THE
WORLD AND, OF COURSE, THE UNITED
STATES IS A VERY IMPORTANT
MEMBER.
>> Woodruff: SO TELL ME, WHAT
DID YOU FIND IN TERMS OF
INEQUALITY THAT DISTURBED YOU SO
MUCH?
THIS IS A BIG FOCUS FOR YOU.
>> BEFORE THE CRISIS, INEQUALITY
HAD BEEN RISING, ALREADY.
IN 2008, AFTER THREE YEARS OF
RESEARCH, WE STARTED TEN YEARS
AGO, AND THEN IN 2008 WE ISSUED
A REPORT CALLED "GROWING
UNEQUAL?"
WITH A QUESTION MARK.
A LITTLE LATER WE REMOVED THE
QUESTION MARK BECAUSE IT WAS
VERY OBVIOUS WE WERE GROWING
UNEQUALLY BUT THE DIFFERENCES
WERE GROWING VERY FAST.
IN 2011, AFTER THREE YEARS OF
CRISIS, WE FOUND THAT INEQUALITY
HAD GROWN FASTER I IN 2009, 2010
AND 2011 THAN THE 12 YEARS
BEFORE.
IT ACCELERATED TO THEOINT
WHERE IT WAS BECOMING A VERY
SERIOUS SOCIAL, POLITICAL AND
PRACTICAL ISSUE BESIDES THE
ETHICAL AND MORAL UNDERPINNING.
SO IT IS A PROBLEM TO WHICH NO
COUNTRY IS ALIEN, BUT THE SPEED
AND THE SITUATION TODAY MAKES IT
A FORBIDDABLE OBSTACLE FOR THE
REFOREVER, FOR THE ECONOMIC
RECOVERY.
>> Woodruff: EXPLAIN WHY
THAT'S A WORRY FOR PEOPLE WHO
CARE ABOUT ECONOMIC GROWTH AND
WHAT DO YOU THINK NEEDS TO BE
DONE ABOUT IT?
>> BECAUSE, FOR EVERY 1% THAT
INEQUALITY GROWS, YOU WILL HAVE
A DROP IN GROWTHF ABOUT 0.2,
0.3%.
THAT MEANS A MORE UNEQUAL
SOCIETY WILL GROW LESS, AND
INEQUALITY BECOMES AN OBSTACLE
TO GROWTH IN AND OF ITSELF.
SECOND, THE PROBLEM IS NOT JUST
THE QUESTION OF INCOME.
IT'S ALSO A QUESTION OF
INEQUALITY OF OPPORTUNITIES,
INEQUALITY OF ACCESS TO HEALTH
SERVICES, INEQUALITY OF ACCESS
TO EDUCATION, INEQUALITY TO
ACCESS TO EMPLOYMENT
OPPORTUNITIES, AND THESE HAVE
BEEN ALSO GROWING, AND THEY HAVE
BEEN POLARIZING, THEY HAVE BEEN
CONCENTRATING ON THE WEALTHIEST,
AND YOU HAVE BEEN LEFT NOW WITH
A LEGACY OF A VERY LARGE GROUP
OF PEOPLE WITH LOWER, DROPPING
WAGES THAT ARE ALSO MISSING
OPPORTUNITIES, AND THE PROBLEM
IS THEY'RE GOING TO ALSO LEAVE
THEIR CHILDREN A LEGACY WITH
LOWER POSSIBILITIES.
>> Woodruff: SO WHAT DO YOU
SEE AS THE MAIN REMEDY?
>> THE MAIN REMEDIES ARE
ACTIVATION POLICIES, MEANING GET
SERVICES IN THE GOVERNMENTS THAT
WILL GET THE PEOPLE WHO ARE
UNEMPLOYED OR SEEKING FOR
EMPLOYMENT WITH THE JOB
OPPORTUNITIES.
THIS IS NOT BEING DONE ENOUGH.
THE UNITED STATES SPENDS
ONE-FOURTH OF WHAT THE REST OF
E O.E.C.D. COUNTRIES SPEND ON
THIS PARTICULAR SERVICE, SEEKING
EMPLOYMENT WITH THE EMPLOYMENT
OPPORTUNITIES.
SECOND, SKILLS -- EDUCATION AND
SKILLS.
THERE'S A BIG MISMATCH BETWEEN
THE SKILLS AND WHAT THE MARKET
IS DEMANDING.
THEREFORE, PEOPLE HAVE DIPLOMAS
BUT THEY CAN'T DO MUCH WIT.
THIRD, USE A TAX STRUCTURE AND A
BUDGET IN ORDER TO SUPPORT
COMPANIES THAT MAY BE PROVIDING
JOBS OR BETTER OPPORTUNITIES.
LAST BUT NOT LEAST, REMEMBER,
THIS IS A PROBLEM THAT IS
AFFECTING THE CAPACITY OF THE
UNITED STATES TO GET THE PEOPLE
AT THE LOWEST REVENUE LEVELS AND
AT THE LOWEST EDUCATION LEVELS
TO GET UP IN THE SOCIAL LADDER,
IN THE LADDER OF OPPORTUNITIES.
>> Woodruff: BUT THESE ARE ALL
PRESCRIPTIONS THAT INVOLVE MORE
GOVERNMENT INVOLVEMENT AND
SPENDING MORE TAX DOLLARS OR
RAISING TAXES, SOLUTIONS THAT
POLITICALLY IN THE UNITED STATES
ARE NOT VERY POPULAR.
CONSERVATIVES WOULD PUSH BACK
AND SAY SOME OF THESE THINGS
WOULD HURT GROWTH AND NOT HELP,
TO RAISE TAXES, FOR EXAMPLE.
>> THIS IS A GREAT OPPORTUNITY
OF BIPARTISAN SUPPORT FOR AN
AG MAYBE ONE OR THE
OTHER PARTY, IF THEY SO CHOOSE
TO NOT SUPPORT, WOULD DO AT
THEIR PERIL BECAUSE WE'RE
TALKING HERE ABOUT NOT
GOVERNMENT INTERVENTION BUT
GOVERNMENT DOING WHAT THEY WERE
VOTED IN TO DO WHICH IS TO
PROTECT THE MOST
SECOND, IT IS ABOUT LEVELING THE
PLAYING FIELD, SOMETHING WHICH
REPUBLICANS, DEMOCRATS AND
GOVERNMENTS, SOCIALISTS AND
CONSERVATIVES IN OTHER PARTS OF
THE WORLD IN EUROPE, ET CETERA,
ALL ARE SUPPORTING.
LAST, WHICH IS A COUNTRY WHERE
INEQUALITY AS GROWN MORE IN THE
LAST FEW YEARS, WOULD YOU
BELIEVE SWEDEN?
A COUNTRY THAT IS REPUTED TO BE
VERY EQUAL IN THAT SENSE.
BUT THE PROBLEM IS GENERALIZED.
IT'S NOT JUST IN THE UNITED
STATES.
INEQUALITY HAS GROWN FASTER IN
THE UNITED STATES AND ALSO WHERE
THIS IS NOW BECOMING VERY
EVIDENT WHERE WE HAVE TO ADDRESS
IT.
>> WELL, IT IS AN ISSUE THAT IS
MANY LAYERED.
THE REPORT IS FASCINATING.
I THINK IT'S CERTAINLY WORTH
DISCUSSING AND DEBATING.
THE SECRETARY GENERAL OF THE
O.E.C.D., ANGEL GURRIA, THANK
YOU VERY MUCH FOR TALKING WITH
US ABOUT IT.
>> THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
IT'S A GREAT PRIVILEGE AND,
RIGHT NOW, THE BEST-SELLING BOOK
IN AMAZON IS A BOOK ABOUT
INEQUALITY.
PRESIDENT OBAMA SAID THE
DEFINING ISSUE IN THE REST OF
HIS ADMINISTRATION WOULD BE ON
INEQTY
SO WE SEEM TO BE FOCUSING ON THE
RIGHT ISSUES.
>> Woodruff: ALL THE MORE
REASON WE'RE GLAD TO HAVE YOU.
>> THANK YOU SO MUCH.
>> Ifill: THE ACCLAIMED ACTRESS
AND CIVIL RIGHTS ACTIVIST RUBY
DEE HAS DIED.
DEE HAD A MULTI-FACETED
CAREER, OFTEN ACTING ALONGSIDE
HER HUSBAND, OSSIE DAVIS.
MORE RECENT PERFORMANCES
INCLUDED ROLES IN SPIKE LEE'S
1987 "DO THE RIGHT THING."
AS WELL THE 2007 FILM "AMERICAN
GANGSTER," FOR WHICH SHE
RECEIVED AN OSCAR NOMINATION.
SHE WON AN EMMY, A GRAMMY AND
WAS HONORED BY THE SCREEN ACTORS
GUILD.
SHE AND HER HUSBAND JOINTLY
RECEIVED NATIONAL MEDALS OF ART
AND WERE RECIPIENTS OF THE
KENNEDY CENTER HONORS.
RUBY DEE STARRED ON BROADWAY IN
"A RAISIN IN THE SUN" BEFORE IT
WAS MADE INTO THE 1961 FILM IN
THE SAME ROLE.
IN THIS SCENE, DEE'S CHARACTER,
RUTH YOUNGER, HAS JUST FOUND OUT
THAT HER MOTHER-IN-LAW HAS
BOUGHT A HOUSE FOR THE GROWING
FAMILY IN AN ALL WHITE CHICAGO
NEIGHBORHOOD.
ERE ARE NO OTHER HOUSES?
M AREAS ALL SEEM TO COST
TWICE AS MUCH!
I DID THE BEST I COULD!
>> WELL...
ALL I CAN SAY...
THIS IS MY TIME IN LIFE!
MY TIME...
TO SAY GOODBYE TO THESE OLD,
TIRED WALLS, THESE MARCHING
COCKROACHES, HA!
AND THIS NEVER WAS NO KITCHEN!
I'LL SAY IT LOUD AND GOOD!
GOODBYE, MISERY...
I DON'T WANT NEVER WANT TO SEE
YOUR UGLY FACE AGAIN.
>> YES, HONEY.
IS THERE A WHOLE LOT OF
SUNLIGHT?
>> YES, CHILD.
THERE'S A WHOLE LOT OF SUNLIGHT.
(LAUGHTER)
>> Ifill: RUBY DEE IN "RAISIN IN
THE SUN".
HER DAUGHTER SAID, DEE WAS
SURROUNDED BY FAMILY AND FRIENDS
WHEN SHE PASSED AWAY WEDNESDAY
NIGHT AT HER HOME IN NEW
ROCHELLE, NEW YORK.
SHE WAS 91 YEARS OLD.
>> Woodruff: AGAIN, THE MAJOR
DEVELOPMENTS OF THE DAY.
ISLAMIC MILITANTS IN IRAQ PUSHED
FORWARD TOWARD BAGHDAD, AND
PRESIDENT OBAMA SAID IRAQ MIGHT
NEED U.S. SUPPORT.
ARMY SERGEANT BOWE BERGDAHL WHO
WAS HELD CAPTIVE IN AFGHANISTAN
FOR FIVE YEARS IS HEADED BACK TO
THE U.S. FOR FURTHER MEDICAL
TREATMENT AT AN ARMY BASE IN
TEXAS.
AND, THE FIRST DAY OF SOCCER'S
WORLD CUP GOT UNDERWAY IN
BRAZIL, WITH THE HOST COUNTRY
WINNING ITS FIRST GAME.
>> Ifill: ON THE NEWSHOUR ONLINE
RIGHT NOW, ONE OF THE MOST
RESONANT VOICES OF HIS
GENERATION, CHARLES WRIGHT HAS
BEEN NAMED AMERICA'S NEXT POET
LAUREATE.
THE 78-YEAR-OLD WRITER HAS SPENT
HIS CAREER EXPLORING THE
"INEXHAUSTABLE POWER OF WORDS."
WE TALKED TO WRIGHT ABOUT HIS
CRAFT IN 2011, AT HIS HOME IN
CHARLOTTESVILLE, VIRGINIA:
YOU CAN WATCH THAT ENTIRE
PROFILE, PLUS CHARLES WRIGHT
READING A NUMBER OF HIS POEMS ON
OUR POETRY PAGE.
ALL THAT AND MORE IS ON OUR WEB
SITE, newshour.pbs.org.
>> Woodruff: AND THAT'S THE
NEWSHOUR FOR TONIGHT.
ON FRIDAY, WE'LL TALK WITH
FEDERAL TRADE COMMISSION HEAD
EDITH RAMIREZ ON HER PUSH FOR
CONSUMER DATA PROTECTION LAWS.
I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
>> Ifill: AND I'M GWEN IFILL.
WE'LL SEE YOU, ON-LINE AND AGAIN
HERE TOMORROW EVENING WITH MARK
SHIELDS AND DAVID BROOKS AMONG
OTHERS.
FOR ALL OF US HERE AT THE PBS
NEWSHOUR, THANK YOU AND GOOD
NIGHT.